# WPI-CS1101

This is a repository for WPI CS1101 Introduction to Program Design for A-term 2021 with Professor Engling.

In this repo, you will find 7 projects. Each project serves as both our submissions for labs and homework, as the lab potion of this course was just to complete the first part of the homework.

All code was written in Racket, and was either provided in a starter file and expanded upon by or written from scratch by myself and my homework partner.

# IMPORTANT
This repo is for reference and educational purposes only. Please do your own work and not directly copy our code. There is no guarantee that all the code is perfect, and runs smoothly, and copying does not promote academic integrity. Instead use the code as a guide for the ideas and strategies for programming the assignments. Thank You 
-Brendan Hoag & Adelynn Martin

# Homework 0 - Composing Functions
1. (20 Points)  Evaluate each of the following expressions. Show every step in the 
evaluation. Provide your answers as comments in the Definitions window. For 
example, to evaluate the expression 
(* (+ 4 3) 9)
 
You should provide the following comments in the Definitions window: 
;; (*(+ 4 3) 9)
;; (* 7 9)
;; 63
  
(a.) (* (- (* 5 3) (- 8 (string-length (string-append "CS" "1101")))) (/ 64 16))
 
(b.) (if (< (triple 2) (triple (/ 12 4))) 
    (sqrt (+ 4 (* 15 4)))
    107)
 
where triple is defined as 
(define (triple n)
   (* n 3))

Composing Functions  
 Provide a signature and purpose for each function you write. 
 
2. (20 Points)  In class we played with some built-in functions in the image 
library. Add the following line to the Definitions window: 
(require 2htdp/image)
 
Now click the Run button. The functions in the image library are now available to 
your program. From the Help menu, choose Help Desk. A browser window will 
open. Under the Teaching heading, choose How to Design ProgramsTeachpacks. 
In the left margin, click on HtDP/2e Teachpacks. Here you will find a description 
of all the pre-defined functions in the image.ss library. Notice the ...search 
manuals... box at the top of the page. Type in image-width to find information 
about that function. When the DrRacket Helpdesk provides the matches for 
image-width, choose the one from "2htdp/image". 
 Develop a function called four-square that consumes an image and produces an 
image that consists of 4 copies of the original image, as shown in this example: 
if the original image looks like this:
then the produced image should look like this:
Use the DrRacket help desk to learn about the following functions (available in 
the 2htdp/image library) that you might consider using for this problem: 
flip-vertical 
flip-horizontal 
beside 
above 
rotate
(You're not restricted to using these functions. You may solve the problem 
any way you want as long as the image is duplicated in the same manner 
as the image in the illustration.) You may use the image in this problem 
for testing purposes, or you may test your program with an image of your 
own choosing (see Google images). Use a square-shaped image. To copy 
an image, right-click on the image, select Copy, then in the DrRacket 
Definitions window, select Paste. You should give your image a name 
using define. 

3. (70 Points)  A local performing arts center books various events. Every event 
costs the center $2500 (for utility costs, custodial help, etc.) plus $3 per attendee 
(for program printing, etc.). You are to define a set of functions that will calculate 
the profit for an event based on the number of attendees and the price of a ticket.
Develop a function cost that consumes the number of attendees at an event and produces the cost to the performing arts center to hold the event.
Develop a function revenue that consumes the number of attendees and the price per ticket and produces the revenue generated by ticket sales.
Develop a function profit that consumes the number of attendees and the price per ticket and produces the profit for the event.
 Use defined constants where appropriate.   Make sure each function you define is 
documented with a signature and a purpose. 

4. (40 Points)  Develop a function total-house-cost. The function consumes the 
purchase price of a house and the amount of the down-payment, and produces the 
grand total paid by the buyer for the house, as described in the following 
paragraph. The following terms apply: 
The principal is the difference between the purchase price and the down-payment. 
Only the principal is used in the calculation of the interest. 
The interest is calculated using the formula for simple interest (rate * amount * time). 
The period of the loan is 20 years, and the interest rate is 3% per year. 
Bank fees (closing costs) total $1500. 
The total cost of the house is the purchase price plus the interest paid plus the fees. 
You should develop helper functions and define constants as necessary. 
Make sure each function you define is documented with a signature and a 
purpose.

# Homework 1 - Defining Structs & Programming with Structs
The website for a movie theater contains information about each of the films currently 
being shown in the theater. The following information is stored for a film:
the title of the film 
the film's genre (drama, comedy, family, etc.) 
the film's rating. A rating can be one of G, PG, PG-13, R, NC-17, NR. 
the running time of the film, in minutes 
the date the film opened at the theater (it should include the year, month, and day) 
the total box office receipts collected so far for the film (in millions of dollars) 
Problems
1. (20 Points) Provide data definitions for both a Film and a Date. Include both the define-structs and at least three examples for each data definition. When creating a struct, the order of the fields in the constructor should match the order given in the descriptions above. The names of the fields in the struct don't matter, but the order does. For example, the fields of the struct for a film should be the title, genre, rating, running time, opening date, and receipts collected, in that order. Failure to define the fields in the given order will cause our auto-tester to fail, and you will lose points. Your struct for a Date should have 3 fields, one for the year, one for the month, and one for the day, in that order. Each field in a Date is of type Natural. 
2. (15 Points)  In a comment in the Definitions Window, state the signatures of all the procedures that are created by Racket for your Film struct. 
3. (20 Points) Write a function suitable-for-children? which consumes a Film and returns true its rating is G, PG, or PG-13, and returns false otherwise. 
4. (20 Points) Write a function difference-in-receipts which consumes two Films and produces a Number. The number produced is the difference between the box office receipts for the two films (the result should be a non-negative number). 
5. (20 Points) Write a function modify-rating which consumes a Film and a String (representing a rating), and produces a Film. The Film that is produced is the same as the original except that its rating has been replaced by the given rating. 
6. (25 Points) Write a function opens-before? which consumes a Film and a Date, and produces a Boolean. The function produces true if the given Film opens before the given Date, and returns false otherwise. 

# Homework 2 - Itemizations and Simple List Processing
Writing Data Definitions for Itemizations
For weeks, firefighters have been battling wildfires in California. Floods have plagued 
areas in Louisiana, Tennessee, and metro New York. In this assignment, you'll create data 
definitions for various kinds of weather-related phenomena, and write programs over 
those data definitions. 
A storm can be any one of the following (use the names in bold  to name your structs): 
hurricane Information required for a hurricane consists of the name of the hurricane, the category (a number between 1 and 5, inclusive), the maximum sustained winds in miles per hour, the velocity of the storm in miles per hour, and the storm's heading (for example, NNW). 
thunderstorm The definition of a thunderstorm consists of the number of inches of rainfall, the maximum wind gust in miles per hour, the velocity of the storm in miles per hour, and its heading. 
fire A fire is represented by the number of square miles it covers, the number of days it has been raging, and the number of people displaced by the fire. 
1. (20 Points) Develop a data definition for each type of storm described above, and a data definition for an itemization for storms. When creating a struct, the order of the fields in the struct should match the order given in the descriptions above. For example, the fields of the struct for a hurricane should be the name, category, maximum wind, velocity, and heading, in that order. Failure to define the fields in the given order will cause our auto-tester to fail, and you will lose points. 
Provide at least one example for each kind of storm.  
2. (20 Points)   Provide the template for each data definition you made in Problem 1 (including the itemization for storm). 
 
Writing Programs for Itemizations
If you're working with a homework partner... You and your partner should review the data definitions and templates you each came up with in Lab 2. Make changes, if necessary, and complete any of the exercises you didn't get to during the lab. Create your Homework 2 file according to the naming conventions for homework files posted on Canvas, and copy/paste your data definitions and templates into your homework file. If you're working by yourself... copy your Lab 2 work into your Homework 2 file (name your file yourLastName-yourFirstName-hw2), and continue working on Homework 2. Everyone... Make sure your function names are exactly the same as the names given in the problems. Otherwise, our auto-tester will fail, and you will lose points. 

3. (25 Points)   Write a function high-impact? that consumes a storm and produces a boolean. The function returns true if the storm is a category 4 or 5 hurricane, a thunderstorm with more than 3 inches of rainfall and winds exceeding 60mph, or a fire covering at least 50 square miles.
4. (25 Points)  Write a function change-heading that consumes a storm and a heading and produces a storm. The storm is returned unchanged if the given storm is a fire. Otherwise, the storm that's produced is a storm the same as the original, except that the heading has been changed to the given heading. 
Writing Programs for Simple Lists
In the following problems, use this data definition for ListOfString:
;; a ListOfString is one of
;;  empty
;;  (cons String ListOfString)
;; interp:  ListOfString represents a list of strings
5. (25 Points)  Develop a function character-count that consumes a ListOfString and counts the total number of characters in all strings in the list. 
6. (30 Points)  Develop a function numeric-strings that consumes a ListOfString and produces a ListOfString. The list that's produced contains only those strings from the original list that consist entirely of numeric characters. (Hint: check the DrRacket help desk for various built-in string functions that will help you solve this problem). 
7. (30 Points)  Write a data definition to represent a list of natural numbers (call it  ListOfNatural). Then develop a function lengths-of-strings that consumes a ListOfString and produces a ListOfNatural. The function produces a list of the lengths of each of the strings in the given ListOfString.

# Homework 3 - Lists and Functions on Lists of Struct
The wait staff in a local restaurant use hand-held devices to record customers' orders. In the following problems, you will write data definitions and functions that model the ordering of items from the restaurant's menu.
1. (20 Points)  Each item on the menu consists of the name of the item, the kind (appetizer, entree, dessert, or beverage), whether or not the item is vegetarian?, the quantity of the items ordered, and the cost of a single item. Provide a data definition for Menu-item that represents the given information. Give at least 3 examples of menu items. 
2. (5 Points)  Write the template for functions over menu-items. 
3. (10 Points)  Define an Order (a ListOfMenu-item).  Give at least two examples of orders. Your lists should contain more than a single menu item.
4. (5 Points)  Write the template for functions over an order (a ListOfMenu-item). As you develop the following functions over orders, develop auxiliary (helper) functions over menu items.
5. (30 Points)  Develop the function count-appetizers, that consumes an order and returns the number of items in the order that are appetizers. (Here the quantity of each appetizer in the list is not taken into account by this function - the function simply counts each menu item in the list that is classified as an appetizer.) 
6. (30 Points)  Develop a function list-expensive-vegetarian that consumes an order and a number and produces an order. The order that is produced contains only those items from the original order that are vegetarian and that cost more than an amount given. 
7. (30 Points)  Develop a function order-total. The function consumes an order and produces the total cost of the order (a number). When calculating the total cost, you must take into account the quantity of each item ordered. 
8. (30 Points)  Develop a function beverage-total that consumes an order and produces a number. The function calculates the cost of all beverages in the order (again, take quantities into account).
 9. (30 Points)  Develop a function called cost-with-tip. The function consumes an order and a number representing the percent of the tip. The function produces the total cost of the order with the tip. When calculating the cost, the tip is applied only to non-beverage items. 

# Homework 4 - Binary Search Trees
An important variant of the binary tree is the binary search tree (BST). In a binary search tree, the tree is organized such that the key in any given node of the tree meets the conditions that all keys in the node's left subtree are less than the key in the given node, and all the keys in the node's right subtree are greater than the key in the given node. This organization makes the task of searching the tree more efficient (in terms of the number of comparisons needed to find a given key) than would be the case for a regular binary tree.  This property (smaller values in the left subtree, greater values in the right subtree) is called the invariant of the binary search tree.
1.  (25 Points)  The Registrar's office at a local college keeps a database on the courses offered at the college. In order to provide efficient access to the data, the designer of the database decides to store the information about courses in a binary search tree. In addition to the components that provide access to the left and right branches of the tree, each node in the tree contains a unique course ID (the key value), the title of the course, the name of the instructor, and a list of students enrolled in the course. Information about a student consists of the name of the student, and his or her email address.  Write the data definitions for Student and ListOfStudent. Provide at least two examples of Student. Provide at least two examples of ListOfStudent. 
Use this data definition for your binary search tree: 
;; a BST is one of
;;   false
;;   CourseNode
;; a CourseNode is a (make-coursenode Number String String ListOfStudent BST BST) 

(define-struct coursenode (course-id title instructor students left right))

 (Course ID's will be something like 92.101, where 92 represents the department, and 101 identifies a course in department 92. The course ID is used as the key value in the BST.) Write the interpretation for a BST (including the invariant). 

Write the data definitions needed for this binary search tree. (Hints: the data definition for a binary search tree follows exactly the same model as we used for a plain binary tree. The step that will differentiate a binary search tree from a tree like a family tree is the step in which you construct examples - see the next problem. Also, the interpretation part of your data definition should include a comment that describes the binary search tree invariant.) 
2.  (10 Points)  Provide an example of a binary search tree containing information for at least 5 courses. Make sure you construct your example so that the courses are placed in the tree according to course number, satisfying the binary search tree invariant. 
3.  (15 Points)  Write the templates for functions operating on the structs specified by the data definitions in Problem 1.  
4.  (30 Points)  Write a function any-taught-by? which consumes a binary search tree and the name of an instructor, and produces true if any of the courses in the course database are taught by the given instructor. 
5.  (25 Points)  Write a function drop-student that consumes a binary search tree, a course number, and the email address of a student, and produces a binary search tree. The function drops (removes) the student with the given email address from the list of students enrolled in the given course. (If there is no enrolled student with the given email address, the tree that is returned by the function is the same as the original. We will, perhaps, discuss better ways to handle such errors later.) Your function should be written efficiently, taking advantage of the binary search tree invariant to minimize the number of comparisons needed to find the course with the correct course number. You may assume that the given course number exists in the tree.  
6.  (25 Points)  Write a function list-titles-in-order-by-coursenum. The function consumes a binary search tree and produces a list of the titles of the courses, sorted in order by ascending course number. (Hint: you don't have to write a sorting algorithm. Use what you know about the order of items in a binary search tree to help you. You will need to use the built-in function append for this problem.) 
7.  (25 Points)  Write a function add-course. The function consumes a binary search tree, a course number, a course title, and the name of the instructor, and creates a binary search tree the same as the original except that a new course with the given information has been added to the tree. The course is created with an empty enrollment list. Make sure that the tree that is produced is a binary search tree. You may assume that the course number does not already exist in the given tree. (Hint: new items are always added at the "leaf" end of the tree. Items are never inserted into the middle layers of a binary search tree.)

# Homework 5 - Hierarchies & Higher-Order Functions
There are two parts to this assignment. In Part 1, you will define data and functions for a hierarchy. In Part 2, you will use map and filter to re-write some of the list functions we developed a couple of weeks ago.
Part 1:  A river system can be represented as a hierarchy. For example, a list of some of the tributaries that feed into the Missouri River includes the Jefferson, Sun, Yellowstone, Madison, and Gallatin Rivers. The Jefferson, in turn, is fed by the Beaverhead and Big Hole rivers. The Yellowstone is fed by the Gardner, Shields, and Boulder rivers, and so on. In this set of exercises you will create a data definition for a river and its tributaries, and write programs that answer questions about the quality of the water in the rivers.Assume that for each river, measurements of the river's pH and DO (dissolved oxygen) levels are available. Such measurements are taken at the confluence of the rivers (the point at which the tributaries converge). pH levels can range from 0 (most acidic) to 14 (most alkaline). The normal range for bodies of water are 6.5 - 8.5. DO is measured in milligrams per liter (mg/L). DO levels are dependent on many factors, including water temperature, salinity, atmospheric pressure, aeration, and bacterial levels. Dissolved oxygen levels can range from less than 1 mg/L to more than 20 mg/L depending on how all of these factors interact. 
1. (10 Points)  Provide data definitions for a river system. For each river in the hierarchy, you should record the following information: the name of the river, the pH (ph) of the water, the DO (do) in mg/L, and a list of the tributaries (rivers) that feed into the river. The name of your struct should be river. Make sure you define the fields for a river in the order given in the description. 
2. (5 Points)  Provide an example of a river system that starts with a single river and consists of at least two levels in the hierarchy below that. You may use the example given above for the Missouri River, if you wish. (You may make up numbers for pH and DO - for these exercises we're not concerned about the accuracy of the information, just that you can provide a correct model for the information.) 
3. (10 Points)  Provide the templates for your function definitions, i.e. river-fcn and list-of-river-fcn. 
4. (30 Points)  Develop a function list-acidic-rivers that consumes a river system and produces a list of string. The function returns a list of the names of rivers in the system that have a pH level lower than 6.5.
5. (30 Points)  Develop a function unhealthy? that consumes a river system and produces a boolean. The function returns true if any river in the system has a pH below 6.5 or over 8.5 or a DO under 6ppm. 
6. (30 Points)  Acid rain can lower the pH of water in a river system. Develop a function lower-all-ph that consumes a river system and produces a river system. The river system that is produced is the same as the original, except that the pH of all the rivers in the system have been lowered by 0.3. 
7. (30 Points)  Write a function find-subsystem that consumes the name of a river and a river system and produces either a river system or #false. The function returns the portion of the original river system that has the named river as its root. If there is no river in the system with the given name, the function returns false. 
 
Part 2:  In Homework 3 we developed several functions that were designed to process a list of menu items in a restaurant. As you solve the following problems, you may use this set of data definitions from Homework 3:
(define-struct menu-item (name kind vegetarian? quantity price))
;; a MenuItem is a (make-menu-item String String Boolean Natural Number)
;; interp:
;;        MenuItem represents an item for an electronic menu system in a restaurant, where
;;        name is the name of the menu item
;;        kind indicates whether the item is a beverage, entree, appetizer, dessert
;;        vegetarian?  is true if the item is vegetarian
;;        qty is the number of that item that has been ordered
;;        price is the cost of a single item
;; an Order (ListOfMenu-item) is either
;; empty, or
;; (cons Menu-item Order)

Start by copying and pasting the data definitions for Menu-item and ListOfMenu-item (Order) to your DrRacket Definitions window.
8. (20 Points)  Using map and/or filter (or other higher-order functions), define a new function dollar-menu-items with the following signature and purpose:  
;; dollar-menu-items:  ListOfMenu-items -> ListOfString
;; consumes a list of menu items and produces a list of the names of all the items with prices of $1 or less
9. (15 Points)  Using map and/or filter (or other higher-order functions), define the function all-same-kind? that has the following signature and purpose:  
;; all-same-kind?: ListOfMenu-item String -> Boolean
;; consumes a ListOfMenu-items and a kind of food and produces true if every item is of that kind
10. (15 Points)  Using map and/or filter (or other higher-order functions), redefine the function list-expensive-vegetarian that you wrote for Homework 3, that has the following signature and purpose:  
;; list-expensive-vegetarian:  ListOfMenu-item Number -> ListOfMenu-item
;; consumes a list of menu items and returns a list of those vegetarian items that exceed the given amount

# Homework 6 - Mutable Variables & Accumulator-Style Recursion
In a simple email system, users have usernames and a collection of messages in their mailbox. A message consists of the sender's username, the text of the message (a String), and a flag indicating whether or not the user has read? the message. An email-system is a collection of users (ListOfUser). A Word about Testing As we will discuss in class, testing programs that use mutable variables becomes more complicated than testing programs that don't use mutable variables. If you write helper functions for this assignment that can be tested with check-expect, you should provide test cases for those functions, as usual.You do not have to show test cases that result in error conditions. You do not have to show test cases for any function that involves mutation. The graders will be running your programs with their own set of tests (see below). However, make sure you understand how to construct tests for functions that use mutation (you might be asked something about this on the third exam). 
Problems
1. (15 Points)  Write the data definitions for an email-system (ListOfUser).  Provide data definitions for a message and a user. As mentioned above, each message consists of the sender's username (a String), the text of the message (a String), and a (Boolean) flag indicating whether or not the (recipient) user has read? the message; and a user consists of a username (a String) and a mailbox (a ListOfMessage). 
2. (10 Points)  Create and document two variables: variable mailsys, an empty email system (with no users) and variable  newuser, a user with name "Newuser" and an empty list of messages. 
3. (15 Points / 5 Bonus)  Write a function add-user that consumes a username and produces void. The effect of the function is to add a new user with the given username to the mail system. The new user should have an empty mailbox. You may assume that the username is not already in the mail system. 
4. (15 Points / 5 Bonus)  Write a function send-email that consumes the name of the sender of an email, the name of the recipient of the email, and the text of an email message, and produces void. The effect of the function is to store a new unread message in the recipient's mailbox. Assume the named recipient is a user in the mail system.  
5. (20 Points)  Write a function get-unread-messages that consumes a username and produces a list of messages. The produced list contains the unread messages in the mailbox of the user with the given name. Assume the username is a valid user in the mail system. An effect of the function is that all unread messages in the named user's mailbox have been set to read. 
6. (25 Points)  Write a function most-messages that doesn't consume anything. The function produces the user in the mailsystem with the largest number of messages in his/her mailbox. If there are no users in the system, the function produces an appropriate error. If two or more users have the most messages, the function just needs to return one of them (it doesn't matter which one). You must use accumulator-style programming to solve this problem. 
 
7. (10 Bonus Points)  Show a sequence of test cases that you would use to test the email system.   [One point for each -- max three for each of four functions above.] The graders will be running your programs with a set of test cases such as the following (there will be additional tests besides the ones shown):
(add-user "Gompei")
(add-user "Attila")
(send-email "Gompei" "Attila" "Goat big or goat home!")
(send-email "Attila" "Gompei" "You must be quackers!")
(send-email "Gompei" "Attila" "You have goat to be kidding!")
(get-unread-messages "Newuser")
(get-unread-messages "Gompei")
(get-unread-messages "Attila")
(most-messages)
Make sure that your functions adhere to the signature/purpose given, otherwise the test cases won't run. Also, make sure you name the functions as indicated in each problem.
Accumulator-Style Recursion
8. (20 Points)  Using accumulator-style recursion, write a function total-string-length that consumes a ListOfString and produces the sum of the lengths of the strings in the list.
9. (20 Points)  Using accumulator-style recursion, write a function one-giant-string that consumes a ListOfString and produces the concatenation of strings in the list in the order they appear in the list. That is, (one-giant-string (list "Alice" "Bob" "Eve") returns "AliceBobEve".
